README.md, before:

# Better Aligning Text-to-Image Models with Human Preference

![teaser](assets/github_banner.png)

### [Project page](https://tgxs002.github.io/align_sd_web/) | [Arxiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.14420) | [Space demo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/xswu/align_sd)

This is the official repository for the paper: Better Aligning Text-to-Image Models with Human Preference. The paper demonstrates that Stable Diffusion can be improved via learning from human preferences. By learning from human preferences, the model is better aligned with user intentions, and also produce images with less artifacts, such as weird limbs and faces.

## Updates
*  [03/29/2023] We released [a Web demo using Gradio on Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/spaces/xswu/align_sd). Check it out!

## Human preference dataset
![examples](assets/examples.png)

The dataset is collected from the Stable Foundation Discord server. We record human choices on images generated with the same prompt but with different random seeds.
The compressed dataset can be downloaded from [here](https://mycuhk-my.sharepoint.com/:u:/g/personal/1155172150_link_cuhk_edu_hk/ESCl7RD3cE9FsitV0P2F8DABC1zRJxbCMI-AXei2Nwx2vA?e=ILRanj).
Once unzipped, you should get a folder with the following structure:
```
dataset
---- preference_images/
-------- {instance_id}_{image_id}.jpg
---- preference_train.json
---- preference_test.json
```
The annotation file, `preference_{train/test}.json`, is organized as:
```
[
    {
        'human_preference': int,
        'prompt': str,
        'id': int,
        'file_path': list[str],
        'user_hash': str,
        'contain_name': boolean,
    },
    ...
]
```
The annotation file contains a list of dict for each instance in our dataset. Besides the image paths, prompt, id and human preference, we also provide the hash of user id. The prompts with names are flagged out by the `contain_name` field.

<!-- data format specification -->

## Human Preference Classifier
The pretrained human preference classifier can be downloaded from [OneDrive](https://mycuhk-my.sharepoint.com/:u:/g/personal/1155172150_link_cuhk_edu_hk/EWDmzdoqa1tEgFIGgR5E7gYBTaQktJcxoOYRoTHWzwzNcw?e=b7rgYW).
Before running the human preference classifier, please make sure you have set up the CLIP environment as specified in the [official repo](https://github.com/openai/CLIP).

```python
import torch
import clip
from PIL import Image

device = "cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "cpu"
model, preprocess = clip.load("ViT-L/14", device=device)
params = torch.load("path/to/hpc.pth")['state_dict']
model.load_state_dict(params)

image1 = preprocess(Image.open("image1.png")).unsqueeze(0).to(device)
image2 = preprocess(Image.open("image2.png")).unsqueeze(0).to(device)
images = torch.cat([image1, image2], dim=0)
text = clip.tokenize(["your prompt here"]).to(device)

with torch.no_grad():
    image_features = model.encode_image(images)
    text_features = model.encode_text(text)

    image_features = image_features / image_features.norm(dim=-1, keepdim=True)
    text_features = text_features / text_features.norm(dim=-1, keepdim=True)

    hps = image_features @ text_features.T
```
Remember to replace `path/to/hpc.pth` with the path of the downloaded checkpoint.
The training script is based on [OpenCLIP](https://github.com/mlfoundations/open_clip). We thank the community for their valuable work.
The script will be released soon.

## Adapted model

### Checkpoint
The LoRA checkpoint of the adapted model can be found [here](https://mycuhk-my.sharepoint.com/:u:/g/personal/1155172150_link_cuhk_edu_hk/ETbAtw6J9AdCq-afxHsZT6kBsnWa_mWXStzqyIyu1hxVuQ?e=MnX7tt). We also provide the regularization only model trained without the guidance of human preferences at [here](https://mycuhk-my.sharepoint.com/:u:/g/personal/1155172150_link_cuhk_edu_hk/ESgC8KMIBoZOuGLsBGzu164Bxzwucwp_Jc5xBvTwA9sagA?e=RW4aaV).

### Inference

You will need to have [diffusers](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/index) and [pytorch](https://pytorch.org/) installed in your environment.
Please check [this blog](https://huggingface.co/blog/stable_diffusion) for details.
After that, you can run the following command for inference:
```shell
python generate_images.py --unet_weight /path/to/checkpoint.bin --prompts /path/to/prompt_list.json --folder /path/to/output/folder
```
**We highlight that you need to add 'Weird image. ' to the negative prompt when doing inference**, for which the reason is explained in our paper.
If you want to do inference on [AUTOMATIC1111/stable-diffusion-webui](https://github.com/AUTOMATIC1111/stable-diffusion-webui), please check [this issue](https://github.com/tgxs002/align_sd/issues/1).

### Gradio demo
- We also provide a UI for testing our method that is built with gradio. Running the following command in a terminal will launch the demo: 
    ```
    # install dependencies
    pip install -r gradio_requirements.txt
    python app_gradio.py
    ```
- This demo is also hosted on HuggingFace [here](https://huggingface.co/spaces/xswu/align_sd).

### Training
```shell
# environments
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
```shell
# download the regularization images to regularization_images
python download_regularization_images.py
# 
```
This script will download all the images of LAION aesthetics 6.5+. In our experiments, ~200K regularization data is enough.
```shell
# Annotating HPS for images from DiffusionDB
python proocess_diffusiondb.py --clip_checkpoint /path/to/downloaded/checkpoint.pth --meta_file diffusiondb_hps.jsonl
# Select images for training
python select_training_images.py --positive_folder positive --negative_folder negative --meta_file diffusiondb_hps.jsonl --output_meta annotation.jsonl 
# Train LoRA weights for Stable Diffusion!
bash scripts/train_lora.sh
```



## Visualizations
![vis1](assets/vis1.png)
![vis2](assets/vis2.png)

## Citation
If you find the work helpful, please cite our paper:
```
@misc{wu2023better,
      title={Better Aligning Text-to-Image Models with Human Preference}, 
      author={Xiaoshi Wu and Keqiang Sun and Feng Zhu and Rui Zhao and Hongsheng Li},
      year={2023},
      eprint={2303.14420},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={cs.CV}
}
```

Commit message:

highlight updates, fix typo, add regularization images

README.md, after:

# Better Aligning Text-to-Image Models with Human Preference

![teaser](assets/github_banner.png)

### [Project page](https://tgxs002.github.io/align_sd_web/) | [Arxiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.14420) | [Space demo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/xswu/align_sd)

This is the official repository for the paper: Better Aligning Text-to-Image Models with Human Preference. The paper demonstrates that Stable Diffusion can be improved via learning from human preferences. By learning from human preferences, the model is better aligned with user intentions, and also produce images with less artifacts, such as weird limbs and faces.

## Updates
*  [03/29/2023] We released [a Web demo using Gradio on Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/spaces/xswu/align_sd). Check it out!
*  [05/10/2023] We release the full training code for adapting Stable Diffusion. Check it out! 

## Human preference dataset
![examples](assets/examples.png)

The dataset is collected from the Stable Foundation Discord server. We record human choices on images generated with the same prompt but with different random seeds.
The compressed dataset can be downloaded from [here](https://mycuhk-my.sharepoint.com/:u:/g/personal/1155172150_link_cuhk_edu_hk/ESCl7RD3cE9FsitV0P2F8DABC1zRJxbCMI-AXei2Nwx2vA?e=ILRanj).
Once unzipped, you should get a folder with the following structure:
```
dataset
---- preference_images/
-------- {instance_id}_{image_id}.jpg
---- preference_train.json
---- preference_test.json
```
The annotation file, `preference_{train/test}.json`, is organized as:
```
[
    {
        'human_preference': int,
        'prompt': str,
        'id': int,
        'file_path': list[str],
        'user_hash': str,
        'contain_name': boolean,
    },
    ...
]
```
The annotation file contains a list of dict for each instance in our dataset. Besides the image paths, prompt, id and human preference, we also provide the hash of user id. The prompts with names are flagged out by the `contain_name` field.

<!-- data format specification -->

## Human Preference Classifier
The pretrained human preference classifier can be downloaded from [OneDrive](https://mycuhk-my.sharepoint.com/:u:/g/personal/1155172150_link_cuhk_edu_hk/EWDmzdoqa1tEgFIGgR5E7gYBTaQktJcxoOYRoTHWzwzNcw?e=b7rgYW).
Before running the human preference classifier, please make sure you have set up the CLIP environment as specified in the [official repo](https://github.com/openai/CLIP).

```python
import torch
import clip
from PIL import Image

device = "cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "cpu"
model, preprocess = clip.load("ViT-L/14", device=device)
params = torch.load("path/to/hpc.pth")['state_dict']
model.load_state_dict(params)

image1 = preprocess(Image.open("image1.png")).unsqueeze(0).to(device)
image2 = preprocess(Image.open("image2.png")).unsqueeze(0).to(device)
images = torch.cat([image1, image2], dim=0)
text = clip.tokenize(["your prompt here"]).to(device)

with torch.no_grad():
    image_features = model.encode_image(images)
    text_features = model.encode_text(text)

    image_features = image_features / image_features.norm(dim=-1, keepdim=True)
    text_features = text_features / text_features.norm(dim=-1, keepdim=True)

    hps = image_features @ text_features.T
```
Remember to replace `path/to/hpc.pth` with the path of the downloaded checkpoint.
The training script is based on [OpenCLIP](https://github.com/mlfoundations/open_clip). We thank the community for their valuable work.
The script will be released soon.

## Adapted model

### Checkpoint
The LoRA checkpoint of the adapted model can be found [here](https://mycuhk-my.sharepoint.com/:u:/g/personal/1155172150_link_cuhk_edu_hk/ETbAtw6J9AdCq-afxHsZT6kBsnWa_mWXStzqyIyu1hxVuQ?e=MnX7tt). We also provide the regularization only model trained without the guidance of human preferences at [here](https://mycuhk-my.sharepoint.com/:u:/g/personal/1155172150_link_cuhk_edu_hk/ESgC8KMIBoZOuGLsBGzu164Bxzwucwp_Jc5xBvTwA9sagA?e=RW4aaV).

### Inference

You will need to have [diffusers](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/index) and [pytorch](https://pytorch.org/) installed in your environment.
Please check [this blog](https://huggingface.co/blog/stable_diffusion) for details.
After that, you can run the following command for inference:
```shell
python generate_images.py --unet_weight /path/to/checkpoint.bin --prompts /path/to/prompt_list.json --folder /path/to/output/folder
```
**We highlight that you need to add 'Weird image. ' to the negative prompt when doing inference**, for which the reason is explained in our paper.
If you want to do inference on [AUTOMATIC1111/stable-diffusion-webui](https://github.com/AUTOMATIC1111/stable-diffusion-webui), please check [this issue](https://github.com/tgxs002/align_sd/issues/1).

### Gradio demo
- We also provide a UI for testing our method that is built with gradio. Running the following command in a terminal will launch the demo: 
    ```
    # install dependencies
    pip install -r gradio_requirements.txt
    python app_gradio.py
    ```
- This demo is also hosted on HuggingFace [here](https://huggingface.co/spaces/xswu/align_sd).

### Training
```shell
# environments
pip install -r requirements.txt 
```
```shell
# download the regularization images to regularization_images
python download_regularization_images.py
# 
```
This script will download all the images of LAION aesthetics 6.5+. In our experiments, ~200K regularization data is enough.
```shell
# Annotating HPS for images from DiffusionDB
python process_diffusiondb.py --clip_checkpoint /path/to/downloaded/checkpoint.pth --meta_file diffusiondb_hps.jsonl
# Select images for training
python select_training_images.py --positive_folder positive --negative_folder negative --meta_file diffusiondb_hps.jsonl --output_meta annotation.jsonl 
# Train LoRA weights for Stable Diffusion!
bash scripts/train_lora.sh
```
After generating the annotation, you may want to adjust the number of positive and negative samples used for SD training. In our experiments, we use 37K positive images and 21K negative images. You may need to tune the ratio to better fit your need.


## Visualizations
![vis1](assets/vis1.png)
![vis2](assets/vis2.png)

## Citation
If you find the work helpful, please cite our paper:
```
@misc{wu2023better,
      title={Better Aligning Text-to-Image Models with Human Preference}, 
      author={Xiaoshi Wu and Keqiang Sun and Feng Zhu and Rui Zhao and Hongsheng Li},
      year={2023},
      eprint={2303.14420},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={cs.CV}
}
```
